## About Barcelona's climate shelters
### ✅ Seeking refuge? The potential of urban climate shelters to address intersecting vulnerabilities
- *Authors*: Ana T. Amorim-Maia, Isabelle Anguelovski, James Connolly, Eric Chu
- *Year*: 2023
- *Abstract*: Climate shelters are critical urban infrastructures to support adaptation to extreme weather. They offer spaces – e.g., parks, libraries, and civic centers – where residents can take refuge during episodes of extreme temperatures. With over 200 public spaces designated as “Climate Shelters”, Barcelona (Spain) serves as an emblematic example of whether these emerging spaces are meeting the needs, expectations, and everyday experiences of the most vulnerable residents. By applying an intersectional climate justice perspective and mixed-method approaches rooted in a survey of a particularly climate-exposed working-class neighborhood (La Prosperitat), we found that the intersecting vulnerabilities of marginalized populations remain poorly addressed, largely due to differences in access to coping mechanisms that overlap with intersecting social positions, exacerbating vulnerability to climate risks. We also found that housing inadequacy and energy poverty experienced by low income residents and those originally from Global South countries made them the most affected and least able to cope with extreme temperatures. Women were also more affected by climate impacts and more concerned about current and future risks. We argue that unequal lived experiences of thermal (dis)comforts inform heat and cold inequalities, which, in turn, are attributed to intersecting social positions and structural vulnerabilities. These uneven lived experiences shape – and are reshaped by – limited adaptive capacity, culturally inappropriate approaches, and insufficiently inclusive public spaces, thus complicating an equity-driven provision of refuge infrastructures. Results call for developing refuge infrastructures that address the intersecting social and climate needs of residents who need them the most.
- *Lesson learned*: it is important to understand whether climate shelters in Barcelona meet the needs of all residents, including the most marginalized people (in this case people living in the La Prosperitat neighborhood), so we can be sure that there is intersectional climate justice. There are intersecting vulnerabilities due to gender, class, migrant status, and other factors, which shape thermal (dis)comfort experiences and could be a reason for heat and cold inequalities. Always pay attention to these aspects to be sure not to exclude anyone. There should be attention to developing more equitable and inclusive adaptation strategies in order to avoid problems of distributive, procedural, and recognition justice. Every citizen should be aware of the existence of climate shelters, which should be present in all areas of the city.


### ✅ RESILIENT AND SUSTAINABLE CITIES: RESEARCH, POLICY AND PRACTICE - Chapter 16 - For a close and livable public space: four proposals in Barcelona 
(Pages 295-304)
- *Authors*: Miguel Y. Cárdenas Mayorga and Maria Pia Gravante Fontana
- *Year*: 2023
- *Abstract*: The decarbonization and humanization of cities require actions to promote active mobility and improve public space. Strategic responses to socio-spatial inequality and urban environmental imbalance must be proposed. Proposals in Barcelona, such as the systematization of the so-called “superblocks” are already well recognized. However, there are other innovative studies and projects that introduce new approaches, methods, and instruments that promote neighborhood life and urban proximity: The “Civic axes for stitching neighborhoods” for Meridiana Ave; the “Network of neighborhood centralities” for the Poblenou-22@ school network; the “Urban strip to make neighborhoods” for Perú-Paraguay street, and the “Climate shelter school network strategy” for the microclimatic management of Barcelona. Studies that exemplify how the use of operational cartographic atlases and models that analyze reality, with parameters and indicators to identify urban patterns, are a useful tool for urban design.
- *Lesson learned*: In the past, public spaces were designed with the idea that they were only surfaces for the circulation of the private car; now it is important to promote more environmentally livable urban environments and streets, as well as  to establish policy and technical solutions that bring balance and spatial justice to the city. It is necessary to promote more livable and appropriate urban spaces for citizens, ensuring better accessibility, habitability, and centrality through an efficacious public space. For this reason, there are four projects in Barcelona: Civic axes to stitch the neighborhoods, Network of neighborhood centralities, Urban strip to make neighborhoods, Climate shelter school network strategy. By focusing on citizens and the environment in which they live it is possible to renew urban planning. In the project "Climate shelter school network strategy", open data is used to try to link schools, educational facilities, public space, sustainable mobility, and socio-environmental conditions in order to facilitate city knowledge and promote urban improvement projects. The project aims to improve the city of Barcelona (innovating from the existing): the city is a system composed of many parts working together. Schools are an important part of this system and connect with the streets, buildings, trees, water, and air. In this way, schools can help create a healthier and more pleasant environment for all citizens by promoting sustainable mobility, public green spaces, and active citizen participation. The project is part of the urban model being developed for Barcelona to respond to climate change and the Climate Plan


### ✅ Climate Shelters Network
https://www.barcelona.cat/barcelona-pel-clima/en/barcelona-responds/specific-actions/climate-shelters-network  
A climate shelter space has the following characteristics:
  - It can be indoors or outdoors.
  - The indoor spaces are activated all year round so they can be used to cope with both the heat and the cold.
  - The outdoor spaces are only active during the preventive phase for heatwaves, which is from 15 June to 15 September.
  - They are spaces that provide the population with thermal comfort, while at the same time maintaining other uses and functions.
  - In indoor spaces, it is recommended that a set temperature of 27ºC is maintained in the summer and 19ºC in the winter.
  - They are especially designed for people who are vulnerable to the heat and the cold (babies, those aged over 75 years and people with a chronic illness or those who are less well-off, etc.)
  - It is NOT for people that need medical care, who must go to the appropriate health centre.
  - They must be easily accessible and safe, and provide **comfortable rest areas** (chairs and benches) and **free water**.
  - The urban parks, which form part of this network, have **abundant urban greenery** (surface area > 0.5 ha) and an **NDVI index** (which indicates the quality of the vegetation) **> 0.4**, they are **accessible** to people with reduced mobility, and they have fountains and seats.
  - Areas designated as climate shelters are **free**.


### ❓Barcelona green infrastructure and biodiversity plan 2020
https://climate-adapt.eea.europa.eu/en/metadata/case-studies/barcelona-trees-tempering-the-mediterranean-city-climate/11302639.pdf 


### ❓Climate emergency action plan 2030
https://bcnroc.ajuntament.barcelona.cat/jspui/bitstream/11703/123712/1/Climate_emergency_action_plan_2030_eng.pdf



### ❓Environmental quality characterization of public schools transformed into climate shelters in Barcelona: A pilot innovative study
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/354081075_Environmental_quality_characterization_of_public_schools_transformed_into_climate_shelters_in_Barcelona_A_pilot_innovative_study   (full text requested, waiting for the answer)
- *Authors*: 
- *Year*: 
- *Abstract*:
- *Lesson learned*:


### ❓Evaluating the impact of urban parks on the thermal comfort during a heat wave episode in a Mediterranean city
https://meetingorganizer.copernicus.org/EGU23/EGU23-1367.html (only abstract available)
- *Authors*: Ricard Segura, Carme Estruch, Alba Badia, Sergi Ventura, E. Scott Krayenhoff, and Gara Villalba
- *Year*: 2023
- *Abstract*: The Mediterranean basin is expected to experience an increase in intensity and frequency of heat wave events. Additionally, heat peaks are exacerbated by the low albedo of urban materials and the heat island effect of urban areas. To reduce heat-related discomfort and health risks, urban planners aim to implement green infrastructures to regulate temperatures thanks to their transpiration cooling effect. For example, the Metropolitan Area of Barcelona (AMB) has created a metropolitan network of “climate shelters”, which are public spaces (both indoor and outdoor) where urban dwellers can find better climatic conditions. Urban parks can be considered “climate shelters” if two requirements are met: the NDVI of the vegetation is higher than 0.4 and the extension of the park is bigger than 0.5 ha. However, given the dense urban edification and space limitation, we wanted to explore the thermal regulation capacity of smaller urban parks which are easier to implement. In this study, we present the results of a micrometeorological measurement campaign to assess the temporal and spatial variations of thermal comfort in parks of different sizes in the AMB during a heatwave episode in July 2022. The goals of this study are to determine the impact on human biometeorology of urban design in the construction of urban parks for facing heatwave episodes and to check the classification requirements for the “climate shelters”. 
Using a mobile human-biometeorological weather station (MaRTy cart), we registered the microclimatic factors affecting thermal exposure at different points inside and outside the parks. From the microclimatic measurements we derived the Universal Thermal Climate Index (UTCI). Additional characterization of the measurement points consisted in sky-view-factor estimations and 360o vegetation and impervious view factors. Throughout the campaign period and measurement hours (14:00, 15:00 and 20:00 LT), the UTCI varied between 29.5 oC (moderate heat stress) and 41.9 oC (very strong heat stress). During the early afternoon, when air temperatures and heat stress are higher, the UTCI is lower inside of the parks, by a difference that ranges from 1.0 oC to 3.2 oC. The sky-view-factor is responsible for 43 to 58% of the observed variability in the UTCI, pointing out the importance of tree shadowing inside the parks. Air temperature has also a clear influence on thermal comfort, explaining between 17 and 50% of the UTCI variability. Although air temperature reductions in smaller parks are not as significant as in the “climate shelter” park, there are vegetation zones inside the smaller parks with comparable reductions in the UTCI. The results show that small parks can provide thermal comfort in similar capacity as bigger parks classified as “climate shelters”.
- *Lesson learned*: requirements for climate shelters: NDVI > 0.4; extension of the park >  0.5 ha. Also small parks can provide thermal comfort in similar capacity as bigger parks classified as “climate shelters”.


## Others
### ✅ Urban heat resilience at the time of global warming: evaluating the impact of the urban parks on outdoor thermal comfort
- *Authors*: Farshid Aram, Ebrahim Solgi, Ester Higueras Garcia and Amir Mosavi
- *Year*: 2020
- *Abstract*: Background: In densely populated urban centers, increased air temperature due to urban heat island (UHI) effect can undermine the thermal comfort and health of citizens. Research has shown that large urban parks can mitigate the effect of UHIs and improve thermal comfort, especially in the warmer months of the year when temperature changes are more noticeable. This study investigated the cooling effect intensity (CEI) of the Retiro Park in the center of Madrid at three different distances from its southern edge and the impact of this cooling effect on thermal comfort from physiological and psychological perspectives. This investigation was performed by measuring microclimate data and conducting a survey simultaneously during the summer days.
Results: The results showed that the CEI of the park varies with distance from its edge. Because of this effect, air temperature within the 130 m and 280 m distance of the park was, respectively, 1.6 °C and 0.9 °C lower than the temperature at the 520 m distance (the nearest heat island). After examining the effect of the park in terms of physiological equivalent temperature (PET), it was found that the PET at the 130 m and 280 m distance of the park was 9.3% and 5.4% less than the PET in the heat island domain. More than 81% of the respondents (in all three areas) had a mental image of the park as the place where they would experience the highest level of outdoor thermal comfort, and this rate was higher in the areas closer to the park. The analysis of citizens’ responses about perceived thermal comfort (PTC) showed that citizens in areas with higher CEI had perceived a higher degree of thermal comfort from the psychological perspective.
Conclusion: This study demonstrates the significant role of large urban parks located in the core of the populated cities in providing thermal comfort for citizens from both physiological and psychological perspectives. Additionally, the results of this study demonstrated that among the environmental (natural and artificial) factors around the park (topography, urban structure, etc.), the aspect ratio has the greatest impact on thermal comfort.
- *Lesson learned*: large urban parks (>10 ha) generates a cooling effect that can reduce the temperature of their surrounding area, this effect  diminishes
at the distance of 520 m, which falls in the domain of a heat island. Hence, the cooling effect intensity (CEI) of the park is higher in the areas closer to the park. But the dimension is not the only relevant aspect, there are other natural and artificial factors around the park that have an important  role in park cooling effect, such as:
  - Urban configuration: organic urban structures can improve airflow and so reduce air temperatures
  - Topography: an urban area with a lower elevation is warmer, as a result, the distance of the cooling effect in the urban fabric is less than in areas with higher elevation.
  - Aspect ratio (ratio between the height and the width of the buildings and streets in the urban area): is an influential element on perceived thermal comfort

  Any increase or decrease in the CEI  will influence the level of thermal comfort of citizens who live or work near the park from both physiological and psychological perspectives. If you are within 520m of the park, you enjoy higher physiological thermal comfort. Parks are seen by people as places to find thermal comfort, in fact they generate thermal comfort for citizens from both physiological and psychological perspectives. If you are in the areas with higher CEI then your degree of thermal comfort from a psychological point of view will be higher



 ### ✅ Capacity of Urban Green Infrastructure Spaces to Ameliorate Heat Wave Impacts in Mediterranean Compact Cities: Case Study of Granada (South-Eastern Spain)
- *Authors*: Manuel José Delgado-Capel, Paloma Cariñanos, and Marcos Escudero-Viñolo
- *Year*: 2023
- *Abstract*: Heat wave episodes are becoming more frequent and severe worldwide, especially in areas such as the Mediterranean region. This study is aimed at assessing the impact of heat waves in an urban environment and the ways areas of urban green infrastructure (UGI) can play key roles in moderating the impacts of these high-temperature events. We analyzed land surface temperature (LST) and normalized difference vegetation index (NDVI) data retrieved from Landsat 8/9 satellite images. These data were recorded during heat wave episodes from 2017 to 2022 in a representative Mediterranean medium-sized compact city. We carried out a correlation analysis between LST and
NDVI per area type and as individual units to assess how UGI elements can contribute to the cooling of the urban matrix during heat wave episodes. Those small green spaces distributed throughout the city, defined as “Other” areas, showed stronger negative correlation. These spaces are particularly relevant for Mediterranean cities, where highly limited space in city centers hinders the possibility of having larger-surface UGI elements. The study highlights the need for further research into the
composition of those small public green spaces to understand how their components enhance the city’s cooling capacity given the climate conditions and water scarcity in the Mediterranean region.
- *Lesson learned*: Four types of green areas are defined in this research: Core (large-sized patches), Node (medium-sized patches), Link ( linear spatial distributions which connect core and node areas with each other), Other (smaller public urban green spaces). Considering all areas, "Other" areas are very important as they are able to strengthen the cooling capacity of cities during heat waves, in fact this area type registers the lowest LST average values. Other areas have a strong cooling capacity against extreme temperatures during heat wave episodes. There is also a negative correlation between NDVI and LST data for the "Other" area type per episode. Hence, "Other" area type can help Mediterranean city during heat waves: for this reason, it is important to identify the composition of these small public green spaces and to  understand how their components contribute to the city´s cooling capacity enhancement

### ✅ Heat waves and adaptation strategies in a mediterranean urban context
- *Authors*: Giuseppe Maggiotto, Alessandro Miani, Emanuele Rizzo, Maria Domenica Castellone, Prisco Piscitelli
- *Year*: 2021
- *Abstract*: Background: Heat waves can be considered as an emerging challenge among the potential health risks generated by urbanization and climate changes. Heat waves are becoming more frequent, long and intense, and can be defined as meteorological extreme events consisting in prolonged time of extremely high temperatures in a
particular region. The following paper addresses health threats due to heat waves presenting the case study of Lecce, a city located in Southern Italy; the Mediterranean area is already recognized in international literature as a hot-spot for climate changes. This work assesses the potential impact of two different adaptation strategies.
Methods: We have tested the effectiveness of cool surfaces and urban forestry as adaptation approaches to cope with heat waves. The microclimate computer-based model “ENVI-met” was adopted to predict thermal scenarios arising from the two proposed interventions. The parameters analysed consisted in temperature and relative humidity. Results: Urban forestry approach seem to lower temperature (that represents the major cause of urban overheating) better than cool surfaces strategy, but relative humidity produced by the evapotranspiration processes of urban forestry has also negative influences on temperature perceived by pedestrians (thermal discomfort). Conclusion: Vegetation represents both an adaptation and a mitigation strategy to climate changes that guarantees an improvement of air quality, with consequent psychological and physical benefits. Wide campaigns aimed at planting trees and increasing the urban green coverage should be systematically planned and fostered by national, regional and local institutions preferably with the involvement of research departments, schools and citizens’ associations.
- *Lesson learned*: Cities can implement mitigation and adaptation strategies to cope with climate change. In the case of urban forestation, a significant decrease in temperature has been observed: shade (acting as a filter for solar radiation) and evapotranspiration (plants becoming a kind of “adsorbing sink” for atmospheric heat) cool the area. We should consider trees and green areas as real and proper public health infrastructures. Hence vegatation is very important because it represents a strategy for adaptation and mitigation to climate change that ensures improved air quality, leading to psychological, physical and social benefits.


### ✅ Analysis of the Urban Thermal Fingerprint of the City of Trento in the Alps
-  *Authors*: Lorenzo Giovannini, Dino Zardi and Massimiliano de Franceschi
-  *Year*: 2011
-  *Abstract*: The temperature contrasts typically marking urban heat island (UHI) effects in the city of Trento, Italy, located in an Alpine valley and inhabited in its inner urban area by a population of about 56 000, are investigated. Time series of air temperature data, collected at an urban weather station, in the city center, and at
five extraurban stations are compared. The latter are representative of rural and suburban areas, both on the valley floor and on the valley sidewalls. It is found that the extraurban weather stations, being affected by different local-scale climatic conditions, display different temperature contrasts with the urban site. However,
the diurnal cycle of the UHI is characterized by similar patterns of behavior at all of the extraurban weather stations: the UHI intensity is stronger at night, whereas during the central hours of the day an ‘‘urban cool island’’ is likely to occur. The diurnal maximum UHI intensity turns out to be typically of order 38C, but under
particularly favorable conditions it may be higher than 68C. An urban cool island effect is also detected, which is probably caused by the compactness of the inner urban area, and displays typical diurnal maximum intensities of order 1.58C. As to the seasonal dependence, at the extraurban weather stations on the valley floor the UHI intensity tends to be slightly stronger during dry months, whereas on the valley sidewalls it is mainly influenced by the seasonal lapse-rate changes. Further weather factors, such as wind speed and cloud cover, also affect urbanization effects, making them weaker with stronger winds and cloudier skies.
-  *Lesson learned*: urban heat island (UHI) is calculated as Tu – Tr: differences between values of the surface air temperature inside the urban environment Tu and in the countryside outside of the city Tr; UHI is higher during nighttime and there are maximum UHI intensities in summer, and minimum values during the winter. The temperature during the day is usually lower at urban site than at the extra-urban locations, for this reason, there are urban cool island; but the strenght of the urban cool island is lower during the summer. The intensity of the UHI is also influenced by the cloud cover: temperature contrasts due to urbanization effects are appreciable under clear sky conditions and become negligible under completely cloudy skies.



### Estimating the Cooling Effect of Pocket Green Space in High Density Urban Areas in Shanghai, China
- *Authors*: Caiyan Wu, Junxiang Li, Chunfang Wang , Conghe Song , Dagmar Haase, Jürgen Breuste 6 and Maros Finka 
- *Year*: 2021
- *Abstract*: Recently, pocket green spaces (PGS), i.e., small green spaces, have attracted growing attention for their various ecological and social services. As a crucial part of urban green spaces in high-density urban areas, PGS facilitates recreation and relaxation for neighborhoods and thus improves the livability of cities at the local scale. However, whether and how the PGS cools the urban heat island effect is still unclear. This research was performed in the highly developed areas of the city of Shanghai during hot summer daytime. We applied a set of cooling effect indicators to estimate the cooling extent, cooling intensity, and cooling efficiency of PGS. We further examined whether and how landscape features within and surrounding the PGS influence its cooling effects. The results showed that 90% of PGS are cooler than their surroundings. Among the landscape features, the land surface temperature of PGS logarithmically decreased with its area, and the maximum local cool island intensity and maximum cooling area logarithmically increased with the area of PGS. The vegetation types and their composition within the PGS also influenced their surface temperature and the cooling effect. The PGS dominated by tree-shrub-grass showed the highest cooling efficiency. The surrounding landscape patterns, especially the patch density and the landscape shape index, influence the cooling effect of PGS at both class and landscape levels. These findings add new knowledge on factors influencing the cooling effect of PGS, and provide the biophysical theoretical basis for developing nature-based cooling strategies for urban landscape designers and planners.
- *Lesson learned*:


### Cooling Effect of Trees with Different Attributes and Layouts on the Surface Heat Island of Urban Street Canyons in Summer
- *Authors*: Shaojun Yan, Tailong Zhang, Yu Wu, Chu Lv, Feng Qi, Yangen Chen, Xiaohua Wu and Yamei Shen
- *Year*: 2023
- *Abstract*: In recent years, the impact of surface heat islands in urban street canyons has become increasingly apparent. However, the research on the use of trees to mitigate surface heat islands remains limited. To address this gap, this study combines experiments and simulations to analyze the cooling effect of trees on surface temperatures under varying timeframes and layouts in an east–west street canyon. The results reveal that the temperature of the road decreases by 10–15 °C, which is 2–4 times greater than that on the south side. Moreover, at 5:00 p.m. in the afternoon, the cooling effect on the south side is 10.3 °C, which is twice that of the north side. In practical planning and design, the diameter of the tree canopy should be maximized, and trees with leaf-area densities greater than 1.5 m2/m3 should be selected. Additionally, the layout of trees should be optimized to maximize the tree canopy coverage. These findings have important implications for optimizing plant selection and placement in street canyons
- *Lesson learned*:

### Addressing the Urban Heat Islands Effect: A Cross-Country Assessment of the Role of Green Infrastructure 
- *Authors*: Walter Leal Filho, Franziska Wolf, Ricardo Castro-Díaz, Chunlan Li, Vincent N. Ojeh, Nestor Gutiérrez, Gustavo J. Nagy, Stevan Savi´c, Claudia E. Natenzon, Abul Quasem Al-Amin, Marija Maruna and Juliane Bönecke
- *Year*: 2021
- *Abstract*: The Urban Heat Islands (UHI) effect is a microclimatic phenomenon that especially affects urban areas. It is associated with significant temperature increases in the local microclimate, and may amplify heat waves. Due to their intensity, UHI causes not only thermal discomfort, but also reductions in the levels of life quality. This paper reviews the important role of green infrastructure as a means through which the intensity of UHI may be reduced, along with their negative impact on
human comfort and wellbeing. Apart from a comprehensive review of the available literature, the paper reports on an analysis of case studies in a set of 14 cities in 13 countries representing various geographical regions and climate zones. The results obtained suggest that whereas UHI is a common phenomenon, green infrastructure in urban areas may under some conditions ameliorate their impacts. In addition, the study revealed that the scope and impacts of UHI are not uniform: depending on peculiarities of urban morphologies, they pose different challenges linked to the microclimate peculiar to each city. The implications of this paper are threefold. Firstly, it reiterates the complex interrelations of UHIs, heat waves and climate change. Secondly, it outlines the fact that keeping and increasing urban green resources leads to additional various benefits that may directly or indirectly reduce the impacts of UHI. Finally, the paper reiterates the need for city planners to pay more attention to possible
UHI effects when initiating new building projects or when adjusting current ones.
- *Lesson learned*:


### Quantifying the seasonal cooling capacity of ‘green infrastructure types’ (GITs): An approach to assess and mitigate surface urban heat island in Sydney, Australia
- *Authors*: Carlos Bartesaghi-Koc, Paul Osmond, Alan Peters
- *Year*: 2020
- *Abstract*: Green infrastructure (GI) can help moderate urban overheating and mitigate surface urban heat islands (SUHIs) by providing protection from solar radiation, cooling surfaces through evapotranspiration, and modifying heat exchanges through advection. However, more research is needed to determine the optimum amounts, compositions and configurations of GI necessary to provide maximum thermal cooling and mitigate urban warming more effectively. In this study, a recently developed ‘green infrastructure typology’ (GIT) scheme is applied in Sydney, Australia to analyse the interplay and cumulative cooling effects of natural and artificial elements in
summer and winter by considering their morphological and spatial characteristics. Thermal-vegetation index (TVX), simple linear regression and correlation analyses were performed to identify factors that are more influential on the cooling effects of GI. After, a hierarchical cluster analysis was performed to group types with similar cooling capacity, representing potential mitigation strategies that could be implemented at local scale. Results presented here demonstrate that the cooling effect of different types of GI on surface temperatures mostly depend on the abundance and composition of natural and man-made features. As thermal performance of GI depends on the interplay between both, this study offers a more holistic and integrated approach to assess and counter urban overheating. Key insights derived from the analysis are presented to provide a better understanding on which aspects of GI and urban form should be considered to mitigate SUHIs more effectively in neighbourhoods urban precincts and streets.
- *Lesson learned*:


